.\" Manpage for tinderbox-ng
.\" Copyright (c) 2005-2026, Pieter Van den Abeele
.\" Distributed under the terms of the LICENSE file in the project root.
.TH TINDERBOX\-NG 8 "2026-05-15" "tinderbox\-ng" "Gentoo build\-testing rig"
.
.SH NAME
tinderbox\-ng \- Gentoo build\-testing rig with overlayfs sessions
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tinderbox\-ng
.I subcommand
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ args... ]
.PP
.B tinderbox\-ng
.RB { \-h | \-\-help | help }
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tinderbox\-ng
is a self\-contained Gentoo build\-testing rig. It builds an immutable
\fBbaseline\fR (latest stage3 + SWI\-Prolog +
.B portage\-ng
+ matching
.IR kb.qlf )
and exposes it as the lower layer of an overlayfs\-backed
.BR chroot (1).
Each experiment runs in its own \fIsession\fR whose writes land in an upper
layer that can be discarded with one command. The host OS root is never
touched: the rig lives entirely under
.BR $TINDERBOX_ROOT
(default
.IR /srv/tinderbox-ng ),
the Portage tree binds in read\-only, and host\-side caches like
.I /var/db/pkg
are not mounted in.
.PP
The headline workflow is \fBside\-by\-side resolver comparison\fR: run the same
target through
.B portage\-ng
and the traditional Gentoo
.BR emerge (1)
in two fresh, identical sessions and inspect their differences. The bundled
Python tooling then feeds those per\-session logs into plan\-correctness
metrics (Jaccard / Kendall\-tau / Spearman / dependency\-aware concordance) and
forecasting tables (median / p75 / max of phase byte and wall\-clock counts).
.PP
.B tinderbox\-ng
runs every chroot operation inside an unshared mount + IPC namespace
.RB ( "unshare \-\-mount \-\-ipc \-\-propagation=private" ),
so all bind\-mounts disappear automatically when the helper exits, even on
.BR SIGKILL .
Session
.I /dev/log
is symlinked to
.I /dev/null
so shadow account tools cannot spam the host syslog/journal.
.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
The first non\-flag argument selects the subcommand. The complete list,
grouped by lifecycle stage, follows.
.
.SS Bootstrap and maintenance
.TP
.B doctor
Preflight \(em verify the host has every required tool, kernel feature, template
and disk\-space margin. Reports all problems in one pass and is run by
.B bootstrap
automatically (skip with
.BR TINDERBOX_SKIP_DOCTOR=1 ).
.TP
.B bootstrap
Build the immutable baseline (stage3 + SWI\-Prolog +
.BR ccache (1)
+
.B portage\-ng
+
.IR kb.qlf ).
Long\-running (~hours). Set
.B TINDERBOX_BOOTSTRAP_SELFTEST=1
to chain
.B selftest
on completion. Set
.B TINDERBOX_REBOOTSTRAP=1
to overwrite an existing baseline.
.TP
.B selftest
Smoke\-test a freshly bootstrapped baseline: runs
.B "compare \-\-pretend sys\-apps/portage"
in a fresh session. Override the target via
.BR TINDERBOX_SELFTEST_TARGET .
.TP
.BR "refresh\-tree " [ "" \fIcommit\fR ]
Re\-pin
.IR shared/portage\-tree
to
.I commit
(default: tip of upstream default branch). Existing sessions keep the old
tree until they are reset.
.TP
.B refresh\-kb
Regenerate
.I kb.qlf
inside the baseline against the pinned tree. Briefly thaws the baseline
write\-protect for the duration of the rebuild.
.TP
.B refresh\-portage\-ng
Re\-deploy the
.B portage\-ng
source tree into the baseline from
.B PORTAGE_NG_LOCAL
(or
.BR PORTAGE_NG_URL ).
Excludes baseline\-internal Knowledge artefacts (see
.BR FILES ).
Does NOT regenerate
.IR kb.qlf .
.TP
.B install\-ccache
Retrofit
.B dev\-util/ccache
+
.I /etc/ccache.conf
into an existing baseline (or bump
.IR max_size ).
Idempotent.
.TP
.B install\-kernel\-sources
Retrofit
.B sys\-kernel/gentoo\-sources
(or
.BR $TINDERBOX_KERNEL_PACKAGE )
into an existing baseline and set
.I /usr/src/linux
via
.BR "eselect kernel set 1" .
Runs
.BR "make defconfig" ,
.BR "make modules_prepare" ,
and
.B make modules
when
.I Module.symvers
is absent so
.B linux\-mod
ebuilds pass
.BR linux\-mod\-r1_pkg_setup ()
inside sessions.
Required for ebuilds that probe kernel headers during
.IR src_configure / src_compile .
Idempotent.
.TP
.B baseline\-thaw
One\-shot migration for legacy baselines bootstrapped by an older
.B tinderbox\-ng
that called
.I bootstrap_freeze
.RB ( "chmod a-w" ).
Restores owner\-write on every file and directory in the baseline. Idempotent
and cheap (~1\~s for a 70k\-file stage3).
.B doctor
warns when this is needed.
.TP
.B refresh\-baseline\-config
Re\-apply the shipped portage templates from
.I share/tinderbox-ng/
into an existing baseline:
.IR baseline.make.conf ,
.IR baseline.repos.conf ,
and
.IR baseline.package.use
(via
.IR cp_template ,
including
.B @NPROC@
substitution).
Idempotent and cheap; does not touch emerged packages,
.IR kb.qlf ,
or portage\-ng.
Use after template updates (notably the
.B LDFLAGS
pin that excludes
.BR \-Wl,\-z,pack\-relative\-relocs )
without a full
.BR TINDERBOX_REBOOTSTRAP=1
rebuild.
.B doctor
warns when
.I make.conf
is missing the
.B LDFLAGS
pin.
.
.SS Session lifecycle
.TP
.BI "new " name
Create an empty session. The session has its own upper, work, merged and log
directories under
.IR $TINDERBOX_ROOT/sessions/ name / .
.TP
.BI "enter " name
Mount overlay + binds and
.BR chroot (1)
in interactively.
.TP
.BI "exec " "name " \-\- " cmd..."
Mount, run
.I cmd
non\-interactively, capture log, unmount. Exits with the command's exit code.
.TP
.BI "exit " name
Tear down all mounts for
.I name
(idempotent).
.TP
.BI "reset " name
Discard the upper layer (revert to baseline). Session directory is preserved.
.TP
.BI "destroy " name
Remove the session directory entirely.
.TP
.B list
Show sessions, mount status, upper size, age.
.TP
.BI "diff " name
Print files modified in the session's upper layer.
.TP
.B status
Show
.B tinderbox\-ng
global state (paths, pin, sizes).
.
.SS Resolver operations
.TP
.BI "portage\-ng " "name " [ "\-\-pretend" | "\-\-build" "] " args...
Run
.I portage\-ng\-dev
inside the session. Default mode:
.BR \-\-build .
Aliases:
.BR portage_ng ", " pn .
.TP
.BI "emerge " "name " [ "\-\-pretend" "] " args...
Run
.I /usr/bin/emerge
inside the session
.RB ( \-\-oneshot ).
Alias:
.BR em .
.TP
.B "compare " [ "\-\-pretend" | "\-\-build" "] [" "\-\-keep" "] [" "\-\-label \fINAME\fR" "] " \fIpkg\fR...
Spin two fresh sessions, run
.B portage\-ng
AND
.B emerge
on the same target in parallel, print a side\-by\-side summary (exit codes,
plan size, completed steps, VDB delta, first error). Default:
.BR \-\-pretend .
The
.B exit
column carries one of:
.B OK
(rc 0),
.B OK(cycles)
(portage\-ng rc 1),
.B OK(assumed)
(portage\-ng rc 2),
.B TIMEOUT
(rc 124,
.BR timeout (1)),
.B KILLED(SIGKILL)
(rc 137, almost always OOM in the matrix),
.B KILLED(SIGTERM)
(rc 143),
.B RESTRICT(fetch)
(ebuild needs a manual download),
.B INFRA(overlay\-inode\-flicker)
(gtar bailed with
.RB \(dq "Directory renamed before its status could be extracted" \(dq
during unpack \(em a documented OverlayFS bug under inode\-cache reclaim
pressure; mostly mitigated by the per\-session
.I /var/tmp/portage
bind\-mount, but residual occurrences are tagged this way for accounting),
or
.BI FAIL( N )
for any other non\-zero exit code.
The plan and build passes have separate timeouts \(em see
.B TINDERBOX_PLAN_TIMEOUT
and
.BR TINDERBOX_BUILD_TIMEOUT .
With
.BR \-\-keep ,
the session upper layers are preserved at
.IR /srv/tinderbox-ng/sessions/pkg-cmp-{portage-ng,emerge}-<label>/upper/ .
Logs land in
.IR /srv/tinderbox-ng/logs/compare-<label>-<stamp>/ ,
split per engine into
.IR portage-ng.plan.log ,
.IR portage-ng.build.log ,
.IR emerge.plan.log ,
.IR emerge.build.log ,
plus a per\-target build log
.RI ( portage-ng.target.<cp>.build.log ", " emerge.target.<cp>.build.log[.gz] )
and
.B portage\-ng's
.IR phase_stats.pl .
Alias:
.BR cmp .
.TP
.B "continue " [ "\-\-run \fIDIR\fR" "] [" "\-\-jobs \fIN\fR" "] [" "\-\-background" "]"
Resume a
.B compare\-matrix
run that was interrupted (host crash, reboot,
.BR SIGINT ).
Auto\-mounts the sessions
.BR tmpfs (5),
auto\-detects the most recent run, recovers mode/manifest/jobs from
.IR meta.txt ,
and dispatches
.B compare\-matrix
on every target not yet in
.IR results.tsv .
Appends to the original run's TSV +
.I meta.txt
(no sibling stamp dir). Alias:
.BR resume .
.
.SS Observability
.TP
.B "progress " [ "\-\-once" "] [" "\-\-interval \fIN\fR" "] [" "\-\-run \fIDIR\fR" "]"
Live dashboard: progress bar + ETA + load avg + RAM + tmpfs + active sessions,
refreshed every
.I N
seconds (default 2). Auto\-detects the latest
.B compare\-matrix
run.
.B \-\-once
forces a one\-shot dump (also the default when stdout is not a tty). Alias:
.BR monitor .
.TP
.B "analyze " [ "\-\-run \fIDIR\fR" " | " "\-\-logdir \fIDIR\fR" "] [" "\-\-out \fIFILE\fR" "] [" "\-\-jobs \fIN\fR" "] [" "\-\-md5\-cache \fIDIR\fR" "] [" "\-\-target\-regex \fIRE\fR" "] [" "\-\-full\-lists" "]"
Plan\-correctness analysis over a matrix run (or any directory of
.IR compare-<label>-<stamp>/
subdirs). Pairs every
.I portage-ng.plan.log
with the matching
.I emerge.plan.log
and feeds them through
.B share/tinderbox\-ng/compare\-merge\-emerge.py
to compute Jaccard set agreement, Kendall+Spearman ordering metrics,
dependency\-aware concordance and violation rate
.RB ( \-\-md5\-cache
required), domain assumptions, blockers, cycle breaks, download set
agreement, and timing. Writes
.IR <source>/analysis.json
and
.IR <source>/analysis.txt .
Alias:
.BR analyse .
.TP
.B "phase\-stats " [ "\-\-run \fIDIR\fR" " | " "\-\-logdir \fIDIR\fR" " | " "\-\-src \fIDIR\fR" "] [" "\-\-out \fIFILE\fR" "] [" "\-\-aggregator \fINAME\fR" "] [" "\-\-min\-observations \fIN\fR" "] [" "\-\-exclude\-glob \fIPAT\fR" "]..."
Consolidate the per\-session
.I phase_stats.pl
files that
.B "compare \-\-build"
salvages into each compare logdir into a single master forecasting file
suitable as the next
.B portage\-ng
instance's
.IR Knowledge/phase_stats.pl .
Aggregator is one of
.B median
(default; robust against cold\-cache outliers),
.BR mean ,
.BR max
(worst\-case envelope),
.B p75
or
.BR p90
(pessimistic forecasts).
.B \-\-min\-observations \fIN\fR
drops
.RI ( Entry , Phase )
buckets with fewer than
.I N
samples.
.B \-\-exclude\-glob
.I PAT
skips matching paths during the input scan (repeatable). Default output:
.IR <run>/phase_stats.pl .
Aliases:
.BR phase_stats ", " consolidate\-phase\-stats .
.TP
.B "extract\-timing " [ "\-\-run \fIDIR\fR" " | " "\-\-logdir \fIDIR\fR" " | " "\-\-src \fIDIR\fR" " | " "\-\-session \fIDIR\fR" "] [" "\-\-out \fIFILE\fR" "] [" "\-\-quiet" "]"
Extract per\-engine, per\-phase wall\-clock timing from one or many
compare session log directories and emit a consolidated JSON report
comparing
.B portage\-ng
to
.BR emerge .
Reads the
.IR <log>.timing
companion files
.B compare
writes after each pass
.RI ( started ", " ended ", " wall_time_ms ", " rc );
falls back to the log file's ctime/mtime delta for older sessions
that predate per\-pass timing capture (entries flagged with
.IR mtime_estimated:\ true ).
Each entry contains the four pass timings (portage\-ng plan and build,
emerge plan and build), pn/em ratios, recovered
.B cpv
when extractable, and per\-phase totals from the session's
.I phase_stats.pl
when present. The summary block aggregates avg/p50/p95/max per pass
and head\-to\-head wins. Default output:
.IR <source>/timing.json .
Aliases:
.BR timing ", " extract_timing .
.
.SS tmpfs management
.TP
.B tmpfs\-up
Mount the shared sessions
.BR tmpfs (5)
(idempotent). Auto\-runs on
.BR new ,
.B compare
and
.BR continue ;
this is for explicit pre\-allocation before a long batch (or to remount after
a host reboot).
.TP
.B tmpfs\-down
Unmount the shared sessions
.BR tmpfs (5)
(only if no sessions remain; destroys their contents).
.
.SH OPTIONS
Most options are subcommand\-specific; see the per\-subcommand descriptions
above and
.B "tinderbox\-ng \fIsubcommand\fR \-\-help"
for the full list. The following are accepted by every invocation:
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help ", " help
Print the top\-level usage summary and exit.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /srv/tinderbox-ng/baseline/
Immutable baseline (overlayfs lower layer). Frozen after
.BR bootstrap .
.TP
.I /srv/tinderbox-ng/shared/
Shared, persistent caches. Bind\-mounted into every session.
.RS
.TP
.I portage-tree/
Git\-pinned Portage tree (mounted read\-only into sessions).
.TP
.I portage-tree.commit
Current pinned commit hash.
.TP
.I distfiles/
Persistent fetch cache.
.TP
.I ccache/
Optional shared ccache.
.TP
.I binpkgs/
Optional shared binpkgs cache.
.TP
.I stage3/
Downloaded stage3 tarballs and signatures.
.RE
.TP
.I /srv/tinderbox-ng/sessions/<name>/
Per\-session directory.
.RS
.TP
.I upper/
OverlayFS upper layer (writes during the session).
.TP
.I work/
OverlayFS work directory.
.TP
.I merged/
OverlayFS merged view (the chroot root).
.TP
.I logs/
Session log directory.
.TP
.I info
Session metadata (created\-at, owner, command line).
.TP
.I .lock
.BR flock (1)
file used for concurrent\-access serialisation.
.RE
.TP
.I /srv/tinderbox-ng/logs/compare-<label>-<stamp>/
Per\-package compare logdir produced by
.BR compare .
Contains
.IR portage-ng.plan.log ,
.IR portage-ng.build.log ,
.IR portage-ng.target.<cp>.build.log ,
.IR phase_stats.pl ,
.IR emerge.plan.log ,
.IR emerge.build.log ,
and
.IR emerge.target.<cp>.build.log[.gz] .
.TP
.I /srv/tinderbox-ng/reports/compare-matrix-<stamp>/
Matrix\-run report directory:
.IR results.tsv ,
.IR meta.txt ,
.IR <label>.log
per package, plus the
.IR analysis.{json,txt}
and
.IR phase_stats.pl
artefacts produced by
.B analyze
and
.BR phase\-stats .
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/tinderbox-ng/
Default install prefix populated by
.BR deploy-host.sh (8).
Layout under the prefix:
.RS
.TP
.I bin/tinderbox-ng
The entry point.
.I /usr/local/sbin/tinderbox-ng
is a symlink to this file.
.TP
.I libexec/tinderbox-ng/
Executable helpers
.B tinderbox\-ng
invokes internally
.RI ( compare-matrix.sh ", "
.IR compare-merge-emerge.py ", "
.IR consolidate-phase-stats.py ", "
.IR extract-timing.py ", "
.IR run-matrix.sh ).
.TP
.I share/tinderbox-ng/
Read\-only data: baseline config templates
.RI ( baseline.make.conf ", "
.IR baseline.package.use ", "
.IR baseline.repos.conf ", "
.IR portage-ng-dev.in )
and the matrix manifests
.RI ( manifest-100.txt ", "
.IR manifest-1000.txt ).
.TP
.I share/man/man8/tinderbox-ng.8
Manpage source.
.I /usr/local/share/man/man8/tinderbox-ng.8
is a symlink to this file.
.RE
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_ROOT
Root for everything (default
.IR /srv/tinderbox-ng ).
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_LIBEXEC_DIR
Override the directory containing executable helpers
.RB ( compare-matrix.sh ", "
.BR compare-merge-emerge.py ", "
.BR consolidate-phase-stats.py ", "
.BR run-matrix.sh ).
Default
.IR $SCRIPT_DIR/../libexec/tinderbox-ng .
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_SHARE_DIR
Override the directory containing data templates and manifests
.RB ( baseline.make.conf ", "
.BR portage-ng-dev.in ", "
.BR manifest-1000.txt ", "
etc.).
Default
.IR $SCRIPT_DIR/../share/tinderbox-ng .
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_LIB_DIR
Legacy single\-bucket override that maps to both
.B TINDERBOX_LIBEXEC_DIR
and
.BR TINDERBOX_SHARE_DIR .
Honoured for backward compatibility with pre\-reorg flat installs.
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_SESSIONS_TMPFS_SIZE
.BR tmpfs (5)
size cap for
.B $TINDERBOX_ROOT/sessions
(default
.BR auto ,
sized from host RAM and compare-matrix
.B \-\-jobs ;
empty or
.B 0
disables; auto skips a nested mount when
.B $TINDERBOX_ROOT
is already
.BR tmpfs ).
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_MATRIX_JOBS
Optional hint for
.B auto
sessions-tmpfs sizing (set by
.BR compare-matrix ).
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_CCACHE_MAX_SIZE
Cap for the shared
.BR ccache (1)
(default
.BR 100G ).
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_KERNEL_PACKAGE
Kernel\-source package emerged into the baseline (default
.BR sys\-kernel/gentoo\-sources ).
The installed source tree is configured with
.B make defconfig
and
.B make modules_prepare
then built with
.B make modules
when
.I Module.symvers
is absent so
.B linux\-mod
ebuilds (e.g. nvidia\-drivers, vhba, ryzen_smu, lkrg,
virtualbox\-guest\-modules) satisfy
.BR linux\-mod\-r1_pkg_setup ()
inside sessions.
Kernel\-mod compare targets are listed in
.IR share/tinderbox\-ng/manifest\-kernel\-modules.txt
(separate from
.IR manifest\-failures.txt ).
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_PLAN_TIMEOUT
Per\-package planning timeout in seconds for
.B compare
(default 1800). Capped at
.BR TINDERBOX_BUILD_TIMEOUT .
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_BUILD_TIMEOUT
Per\-package build timeout in seconds for
.B compare
(default 43200, i.e. 12 hours) and for the
.BR pn / em
standalone runs.
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_MDNS_HOSTS
Space\-separated hostnames that must resolve from inside the chroot (the
host resolves via
.BR avahi (8)
and the script injects the IPs into the session's
.IR /etc/hosts ).
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_REBOOTSTRAP
Set to
.B 1
to allow
.B bootstrap
to overwrite an existing baseline.
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_BOOTSTRAP_SELFTEST
Set to
.B 1
to run
.B selftest
at the end of a successful
.BR bootstrap .
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_SELFTEST_TARGET
Override the package
.B selftest
runs through
.BR compare .
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_SKIP_DOCTOR
Set to
.B 1
to bypass the implicit
.B doctor
preflight inside
.BR bootstrap .
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_COMPARE_ANALYZER
Override the path to
.IR compare-merge-emerge.py .
Default
.BI $LIBEXEC_DIR /compare-merge-emerge.py .
Read by
.BR analyze .
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_PHASE_STATS_CONSOLIDATOR
Override the path to
.IR consolidate-phase-stats.py .
Default
.BI $LIBEXEC_DIR /consolidate-phase-stats.py .
Read by
.BR phase\-stats .
.TP
.B TINDERBOX_TIMING_EXTRACTOR
Override the path to
.IR extract-timing.py .
Default
.BI $LIBEXEC_DIR /extract-timing.py .
Read by
.BR extract\-timing .
.TP
.B STAGE3_VARIANT
Stage3 variant (default
.BR amd64\-openrc\-splitusr ).
.TP
.B STAGE3_ARCH
Stage3 architecture (default
.BR amd64 ).
.TP
.B STAGE3_BASE_URL
Stage3 mirror base URL.
.TP
.B GENTOO_PROFILE
Profile to set in the baseline (default
.BR default/linux/amd64/23.0/split\-usr/no\-multilib ;
must match
.I Source/config.pl
on the
.B portage\-ng
side).
.TP
.B GENTOO_LOCALE ", " GENTOO_LOCALE_NAME
Locale generated and selected in the baseline.
.TP
.B PORTAGE_TREE_URL
Portage tree git URL (default the
.B gentoo\-mirror
repository).
.TP
.B PORTAGE_TREE_PIN
Optional commit to pin during
.BR bootstrap .
.TP
.B PORTAGE_NG_URL
If set,
.B bootstrap
.BR git-clone (1)s
the
.B portage\-ng
source from this URL. Otherwise
.BR rsync (1)s
from
.BR PORTAGE_NG_LOCAL .
.TP
.B PORTAGE_NG_LOCAL
Local
.B portage\-ng
checkout to seed (e.g.
.IR /opt/portage-ng ).
Auto\-detected from the conventional paths
.IR /root/prolog ,
.IR /opt/portage-ng ,
.I /opt/prolog
when unset.
.TP
.B PORTAGE_NG_REF
Git ref to check out from the
.B portage\-ng
clone (default
.BR HEAD ).
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General error (missing prerequisites, command failure, exactly one engine
failed in
.BR compare ).
.TP
.B 2
Domain\-level error (usage error, both engines failed in
.BR compare ).
.PP
The
.B compare
subcommand specifically returns 0 if both engines succeeded, 1 if exactly one
failed, and 2 if both failed \(em useful for CI sweeps. The
.B portage\-ng\-dev
exit codes propagated through
.B portage\-ng
and
.B compare
follow the
.B portage\-ng
convention (0 = no assumptions; 1 = prover cycle\-break assumptions only;
2 = domain assumptions).
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS First\-time install on a fresh VM
.nf
.RS
TINDERBOX_BOOTSTRAP_SELFTEST=1 \\
    bin/deploy\-host.sh \-\-bootstrap root@vm\-linux.local
.RE
.fi
.PP
Pushes the rig to the VM, runs
.BR doctor ,
runs
.B bootstrap
(~hours), runs
.BR selftest .
.
.SS Side\-by\-side resolver comparison
.nf
.RS
sudo tinderbox\-ng compare app\-misc/jq
sudo tinderbox\-ng compare \-\-build app\-misc/jq
sudo tinderbox\-ng compare \-\-build \-\-keep \-\-label jq\-debug app\-misc/jq
.RE
.fi
.
.SS Long\-running matrix runs (preferred: screen)
The
.B compare\-matrix
helper drives
.B "tinderbox\-ng compare"
over a manifest of atoms (one
.IR cat/pn
per line, ``#'' comments OK). A full
.B "\-\-build"
sweep over the in\-repo
.I manifest\-all.txt
(~19k atoms) takes days, so the preferred way to launch one is inside a
detached
.BR screen (1)
session. That keeps a live driver TTY you can reattach to (``screen \-r''),
unlike the
.B "\-\-background"
flag (see
.IR "Resume an interrupted matrix run" ),
which uses
.B "nohup setsid"
to detach into a pure daemon \(em no TTY to reattach to, only the
driver log under
.I /srv/tinderbox\-ng/reports/all\-packages\-driver\-*.log
remains tail\-able.
.PP
.nf
.RS
# Kick off a fresh matrix detached, from your dev machine:
ssh root@vm\-linux.local 'screen \-dmS tinderbox\-ng \\
    compare\-matrix \-\-build \-\-jobs 16 \\
    \-\-manifest /usr/local/share/tinderbox\-ng/share/tinderbox\-ng/manifest\-all.txt'

# Reattach the live driver TTY:
ssh \-t root@vm\-linux.local screen \-r tinderbox\-ng

# Detach again without killing the driver: Ctrl\-A d (inside screen).

# Stop cleanly (in\-flight comparisons finish; partial results stay in TSV):
ssh root@vm\-linux.local screen \-S tinderbox\-ng \-X stuff $'\\003'
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B compare\-matrix
writes results.tsv incrementally and uses an flock so a SIGINT (Ctrl\-C)
or SIGTERM is always safe \(em prior rows are durable, and
.B "tinderbox\-ng continue"
picks up the unfinished tail.
.
.SS Plan\-correctness analysis
.nf
.RS
sudo tinderbox\-ng analyze
sudo tinderbox\-ng analyze \-\-md5\-cache \\
    /srv/tinderbox\-ng/baseline/var/db/repos/gentoo/metadata/md5\-cache
sudo tinderbox\-ng analyze \-\-target\-regex '^dev\-libs/' \-\-full\-lists
.RE
.fi
.
.SS Build\-time forecast consolidation
.nf
.RS
# After a matrix run, build a master phase_stats.pl from every
# per\-session phase_stats.pl salvaged into compare logdirs:
sudo tinderbox\-ng phase\-stats

# Pessimistic forecast across an arbitrary archive tree:
sudo tinderbox\-ng phase\-stats \-\-src /backups/2026\-Q1 \-\-aggregator p90 \\
    \-\-out /tmp/master.pl
.RE
.fi
.
.SS Wall\-clock timing comparison
.nf
.RS
# After a matrix run, extract per\-engine timings into a JSON report:
sudo tinderbox\-ng extract\-timing
# Equivalent: scope by logs dir directly
sudo tinderbox\-ng extract\-timing \-\-src /srv/tinderbox\-ng/logs \\
    \-\-out /tmp/timing.json
# Single session:
sudo tinderbox\-ng extract\-timing \-\-session \\
    /srv/tinderbox\-ng/logs/compare\-app_misc_jq\-20260515T143052

# Drop the master in as portage\-ng's forecast seed:
sudo cp /srv/tinderbox\-ng/reports/compare\-matrix\-<stamp>/phase_stats.pl \\
    /opt/portage\-ng/Knowledge/phase_stats.pl
.RE
.fi
.
.SS Resume an interrupted matrix run
.nf
.RS
# Preferred: same screen session as the original launch, so you keep a
# live driver TTY:
ssh root@vm\-linux.local screen \-dmS tinderbox\-ng \\
    tinderbox\-ng continue \-\-jobs 16

# No\-screen fallback: nohup setsid + pidfile + driver log, no TTY:
sudo tinderbox\-ng continue \-\-jobs 16 \-\-background
.RE
.fi
.
.SH SECURITY
.B tinderbox\-ng
must run as root (it manages bind\-mounts, mount namespaces and chroot jails).
The script never modifies the host root: every chroot operation runs inside an
unshared mount + IPC namespace
.RB ( "unshare \-\-mount \-\-ipc \-\-propagation=private" ),
and all bind\-mounts disappear when the helper exits, even on
.BR SIGKILL .
Session
.I /dev/log
is a blackhole so
.BR groupadd (8)/useradd (8)
syslog noise stays out of the host journal.
.PP
The Portage tree is bind\-mounted read\-only into every session. The host's
.I /var/db/pkg
is not mounted into any session. The session's only writable mountpoints are
its own
.I upper
and
.I work
directories, plus shared writable caches
.RB ( ccache ", " distfiles ", " binpkgs )
that are intentionally shared with the host so successive sessions amortise
build cost.
.PP
.B compare
and the matrix runner pin
.B FEATURES=buildpkg
on the
.B emerge
side to populate
.IR shared/binpkgs/ ;
.B portage\-ng
on the other side respects the same cache via the patched
.I Source/Config/vm-linux.local.pl
shipped in the baseline.
.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Run
.B "tinderbox\-ng doctor"
first when something is unexpectedly broken; it aggregates every host
prerequisite (kernel module, tools, free space, template existence, default
profile) into a single report.
.PP
.B "tinderbox\-ng status"
prints global state (paths, pinned tree commit, baseline frozen?, sizes of
shared caches, sessions) which is the right second step.
.PP
Per\-session logs land under
.I $TINDERBOX_ROOT/sessions/<name>/logs/
and the script always writes a captured log for every
.BR exec .
Compare logs land under
.I $TINDERBOX_ROOT/logs/compare-<label>-<stamp>/
and matrix logs under
.IR $TINDERBOX_ROOT/reports/ .
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR deploy-host.sh (8),
.BR portage (5),
.BR emerge (1),
.BR ebuild (5),
.BR mount (8),
.BR unshare (1),
.BR overlayfs (5),
.BR chroot (1),
.BR ccache (1),
.BR git (1),
.BR rsync (1)
.PP
.B portage\-ng
project: <\fIhttps://github.com/pvdabeel/portage-ng\fR>.
.PP
.B tinderbox\-ng
project: <\fIhttps://github.com/pvdabeel/tinderbox-ng\fR>.
.
.SH AUTHOR
Pieter Van den Abeele
<\fIpvdabeel@mac.com\fR>.
